---
title: Network Applications
section: 5.10
date: 12-30-20
---

# Peer-To-Peer (P2P) Networking

P2P software allows users to share files without the need of a central server. Connections are made on the fly from one user to another. P2P software usually comes in the form as a torrent client such as _BitTorrent_ or _uTorrent_.

---

# P2P Security Considerations

- Malware

  - Files from other users could contain malware

- Bandwidth Hogging
  - Without proper limits P2P can use a lot of upload/download bandwidth
- Knowlingly or Unknowling sharing confidential files
  - Files accessible from other users might be posted illegally

---

# P2P Security Steps

| Security Step                     | Explanation                                                                                                                                                                     |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Block P2P Ports                   | One option is to block the port the P2P software is using. This is not always effective since P2P software can change ports or use dynamic ports.                               |
| Blacklist P2P Traffic             | Add peer-to-peer traffic to the blacklist of a network content filter. The content filter can do all the work of identifying P2P packets.                                       |
| Prevent P2P Software Installation | Blocking the installation of P2P software can be an effective measure for company owned devices. However, this does not protect against P2P software being used on the network. |

---

# Instant Messaging (IM) Applications

Instant Message applications provide text communication and media/document exchange.

---

### Common IM Applications

- Google Talk
- Skype
- iMessage
- Facebook Messenger
- Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
- Slack
- Discord

---

# IM Application Potential Threats

- IM communication could contain malware, viruses, social engineering exploits
- An IM can be susceptable to sniffing, capturing and viewing by others
- Instant Messaging Spam (SPIM)
  - IM systems contain user directories, making it easy to identify spim targets
  - IM systems often contain demographic information about users
  - Information in contact lists can be remotely accessed
- IM clients can provide a lot of information about a user's system and their activity
- Client-side scripting allows attackers to send messages on behalf of other IM users and can be used to create social engineering attacks

---

# Application Control Software

Application controls focus on controlling the applications a user at a workstation can access over a network.

---

#### Benefits

Implementing an application control system can provide additional security to a firewall. The application control system can identify application packets instead of just applying a filter to the network traffic. By identifying the packets this solution can block unauthorized applications. A central application whitelist can be applied to all devices on the network.

---
